[MUSIC]
We're continuing to talk
about UART protocol and
we're gonna talk right here about
how synchronization happens.
So the transmitter and the receiver,
they have to be synchronized.
That is the receiver has to know when
to expect data from the transmitter.
And it has to be fairly accurate
about the timing that it expects.
And UART is an asynchronous
protocol meaning it has no clock.
Normally, if you have
a synchronous protocol,
the clock is how it's synchronized.
When it sees the rising edge,
it knows data will be sent.
But this doesn't have a clock.
So it has to figure out when data
is gonna be sent another way.
So UART synchronization.
So what it means is that
the receiver has to know when it's
looking at that value on that wire,
that serial wire.
It has to know which bit it's reading.
If it's suppose to read and
what bit it's reading.
It has to count the bits.
So for instance say,
it knows that you're sending 8 bits.
It has to know okay now,
is when I should sample bit number one and
then now is when bit number two happen.
Now is when bit number three
should happen and so on.
So it has to know when to
expect each bit to arrive, so
it know when to sample the signal
on that wire to get a 1 or a 0.
If it gets out of sync like that,
that's synchronized.
If the receiver knows when to expect
each bit sent from the transmitter.
If it's not synchronized properly then
the receiver will not expect
the bits at the right time.
It'll receive the wrong data.
So here's an example.
Right here we're show
a little timing diagram.
And we're really showing
three bits being sent.
There's a 1, there's a 0 and
there's a stop bit.
That's what should be sent.
That's what the transmitter
is actually sending.
Now a stop bit is high, the stop bit is at
the end where the signal is actually high.
So it should be sending a 1
then a 0 then a stop bit.
These are just the last
bits of communication.
So I'm just showing the bits 7 and
8 of the last two bits of
say an 8 bit set of data.
And then after the last two bits,
you're gonna expect to stop bits.
So what should be, the expected bits as
they are correctly observed would be a bit
7 would be 1, bit 8 would be a 0 and
then the stop bit is the next bit and
the signal is high and
it would say oh okay, this is a stop.
And if that happened, if the receiver
correctly knew when to observe
those signals,
it would receive the correct bits.
It would receive a 1 for
bit 7, a 0 for the bit 8.
And then it will receive high at the stop
bit and that means that it's working.
That means that is correct.
That is a correct assumption.
The stop bit has to be high.
If the stop bit is low then there's
a problem with the communication.
So if the receiver knows exactly
when to sample the signals,
it will receive the right bits.
But let's say the receiver is off,
it is not synchronized properly.
It started sampling earlier, too early.
So if it started sampling too early, it
might sample the values at the wrong time.
So when that one comes through
instead of thinking oh,
this is bit 7,
it might think it's already on bit 8.
And if that were the case then when that
0 comes through, instead of thinking it's
bit 8, it would think that that was the
stop bit since it's the one after bit 8.
And then it would read a 0 for
the stop bit and
that cause a failure because
a stop bit has to be 1.
So if it was not synchronized
right then it could read a 0 for
the stop bit, that would cause a failure
and will loose the whole byte and
that byte would have to be resent.
So what I'm saying here is that
the receiver has to be synchronized with
the transmitter.
It has to know when the transmitter
is gonna send a byte, a bit.
It has to know which bit is being sent.
So it needs to synchronize on
the beginning of the communication.
So that's what the start bit is for.
So imprecise start time.
If it gets the start time wrong
then it can send the wrong,
it'll receive the wrong bits and
maybe fail in its communication.
So the start bit is how
synchronization happens.
So the start bit remember, at the
beginning before you've actually started
sending anything, the wire is high.
The single wire is gonna be high.
The receiver knows its
transmission is gonna start.
The start bit is happening
when it goes from high to low.
So when there's a falling edge on
that signal then it says okay,
this is the start bit.
Now is when I have to start
synchronizing myself.
Now, we've got two examples.
Two pictures up here,
it's like timing diagrams.
And what they're showing is
two different situations.
Now remember that this UART,
it was made a long time ago.
It's made to be robust
in the face of noise.
So noise, you get all kinds of
electromagnetic noise on these signals.
So this signal maybe it's supposed to be
high because you're not communicating but
there's some kind of glitch.
Some kind of noise,
some kind of electromagnetic noise which
forces the signal to go low, mistakenly.
Now when that happens, if the receiver
is too quick, it might say oh,
the signal went low, I guess communication
is starting but maybe it's just a glitch,
a temporary bounce down.
And it shouldn't consider
that to be a real signal.
It should ignore a short glitch.
So what happens is, it's gonna measure
the time that the signal is low.
So on the left, it's just a glitch.
The signal goes low but
for a very short time.
If it's too short then the receiver
should say oh, that's not real,
that's not really a start.
But on the other hand on the right,
if this signal goes low and stays low for
a significant amount of time
then the receiver should say oh,
this is a real start I need
to synchronize myself.
So the receiver has to be able to
distinguish between a glitch for
a start which is not a real
start signal and a real start.
So it hs to count how long it stays low.
Now see those little up arrows
on the timing diagrams?
Those are the sampling points.
Those are the points in time where
the receiver is checking the signal value.
And you'll notice with the glitch, it goes
low for only three sample sample points.
So the receiver would say oh, it's five or
rather low for three sample points.
That's not enough.
Where if you look at the one
where the startup is detected,
the one on the right, it's low for
I don't know eight sample points and
it would say okay, that's efficient.
So that's what's gonna
happen on the receiver end.
It's gonna sample over and over,
faster than the baud rate.
Typically 16 times faster at least,
and it's gonna count how many times
to find the start bit, it's gonna
count how many samples it's low for.
If it's low for enough samples then
it says yes, that is a real start.
So detection of the start bit is
used to synchronize the receiver and
the transmitter and it's synchronized
based on the falling edge
of the signal and it recognizes
the start bit based on the falling edge.
The following 0 must be of
sufficiently long duration
to screen out any kind of noise.
The receiver has to sample faster than
the baud rate, typically 16 times faster.
That's common.
The start bit Is indicated by a 0 for
at least half a period.
So the length of the period depends
on the length of your baud rate.
But let's say,
you're using a baud rate of 9600 baud.
If you remember, the period length
of that is 104 microseconds.
So the hold period is 104 microseconds,
half a period would be 52,
52 microseconds.
So the receiver,
if it sees that signal go down load for
52 microseconds then it says okay,
this is a real start signal.
We're really starting communication,
I need to synchronize myself
now against that falling edge.
Where if it's less than 52 microseconds
then it says oh, that's just a glitch,
I can ignore that.
Thank you.
[MUSIC]